 Estimating public transport congestion in UK urban areas with open transport models
J. Raimbault1* and M. Batty1
1Center for Advanced Spatial Analysis, University College London February 15, 2021
Summary
Large scale urban transportation models such as four-step models require the integration of heterogenous data and the coupling of sub-models which can already be consequent in terms of complexity. Therefore, such integrated models are difficult to transfer, reproduce, and validate. We propose a modular and reproducible approach based on scientific workflow systems to build and validate such models. We illustrate it by coupling different open-source components within workflows to construct a four-step transportation model applied to all functional urban areas in the UK, and discuss its application to health indicators within public transport in the context of the COVID-19 crisis.
KEYWORDS: Urban transport models; Scientific workflow systems; Modularity; Reproducibility
1. Introduction
Urban transportation models such as four-step models, and more generally land-use transport interaction models (Wegener, 2004), require the integration of heterogenous data and the coupling of various submodules with possibly high levels of complexity. This raises issues on the one hand for their implementation, transferability and reproducibility, and on the other hand for their validation which requires large scale numerical experiments to validate the submodules and the whole models (Lee, 1973; Batty, 2014). This work proposes to tackle both issues by leveraging modularity and transparency for the construction of large urban models in a modular way, using scientific workflow systems (Barker, 2007) to couple the different components of models and to launch numerical experiments for their validation.
2. Methods
More particularly, we demonstrate this approach by building a modular four-step multimodal transportation model using only open-source projects. We couple together the MATSim model (MATSim Community (Horni et al., 2016)) to simulate the transportation system, the SPENSER model (University of Leeds, https://github.com/nismod/microsimulation) for the generation of synthetic population, the QUANT model (University College London (Milton and Roumpani, 2019)) to estimate spatial interactions, and the spatialdata library (OpenMOLE Community \citep{raimbault2020scala}) for data preparation. The model parts are embedded as docker containers into the DAFNI facility (https://dafni.ac.uk/), which workflow system is used to couple them and build the integrated model. DAFNI provides a scientific workflow system for model integration and coupling, direct access to relevant open datasets, visualisation functionalities, and access to a High Performance Computing infrastructure. We show in Figure 1 the workflow constructed with the interactive workflow builder within the platform
1* j.raimbault@ucl.ac.uk
 Page | 1

  Figure 1 Construction of the transport model using the DAFNI workflow system: DAFNI workflow including model steps and a computational experiment (Monte Carlo simulations)
3. Results
The model is run on the largest functional urban areas (following the definition of (Florczyk et al., 2019)) in the UK. We show first results of numerical experiments studying the role of stochasticity on model outputs, for example in Figure 2 for the statistical distribution of trip departure times (these are iteratively evolved by agents in the MATSim model) for a given urban area. We also show in Figure 2 the distribution of car trip distances in the different urban areas.
Figure 2 Results of the simulation of the integrated model on the largest functional urban areas in the UK. (Left) Distribution of trip departure times, for several stochastic repetitions on the same urban area; (Right) Distribution of trip distances for all urban areas.
Source code to prepare the model components, input data, and docker containers is available on an open-source git repository a https://github.com/JusteRaimbault/UrbanDynamics.
To illustrate the reproducibility of our approach, we test the construction of the model with the OpenMOLE workflow engine (Reuillon, 2013), which provides a scripted workflow engine and methods to calibrate and validate simulation models, and suggest advanced numerical experiments for the validation of the coupled model. For example, studying the role of spatial configuration on model outcomes (Raimbault et al., 2019) would be relevant to understand the influence of missing or
 Page | 2

imprecise data and sampling for the synthetic population.
 4. Towards health indicators for public transport
Work in progress includes the application of this model to the development of health indicators within public transportation, and more particularly linking transportation and work-from-home policies with effective densities in public transport which provide potential exposure indicators in the context of the COVID-19 crisis.
5. Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
References
Barker, A., & Van Hemert, J. (2007). Scientific workflow: a survey and research directions. In International Conference on Parallel Processing and Applied Mathematics (pp. 746-753). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Batty, M. (2014). Can it happen again? Planning support, Lee's Requiem and the rise of the smart cities movement. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 41(3), 388-391.
Florczyk, A. J., Corbane, C., Ehrlich, D., Freire, S., Kemper, T., Maffenini, L., ... & Zanchetta, L. (2019). GHSL data package 2019. Luxembourg, EUR, 29788(10.2760), 290498.
Horni, A., Nagel, K., & Axhausen, K. W. (Eds.). (2016). The multi-agent transport simulation MATSim. Ubiquity Press.
Lee Jr, D. B. (1973). Requiem for large-scale models. Journal of the American Institute of planners, 39(3), 163-178.
Milton, R., & Roumpani, F. (2019, May). Accelerating Urban Modelling Algorithms with Artificial Intelligence. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Geographical Information Systems Theory, Applications and Management (Vol. 1, pp. 105-116). INSTICC.
Raimbault, J., Cottineau, C., Le Texier, M., Le Nechet, F., & Reuillon, R. (2019). Space Matters: Extending Sensitivity Analysis to Initial Spatial Conditions in Geosimulation Models. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 22(4).
Reuillon, R., Leclaire, M., & Rey-Coyrehourcq, S. (2013). OpenMOLE, a workflow engine specifically tailored for the distributed exploration of simulation models. Future Generation Computer Systems, 29(8), 1981-1990.
Wegener, M. (2004). Overview of land use transport models. In Handbook of transport geography and spatial systems. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Biographies
All contributing authors should include a biography of no more than 50 words each outlining their career stage and research interests.
Page | 3

